My name is Chandrika Joshi and I have come today to a home of a beautiful family and
it's 24th of March 2024 and I've come to interview a wonderful lady.
Hello, my name is Karim Ali Bhai.
We are from Uganda and settled in Cardiff very well.
Thank you Karim Ali Bhai.
You started from Uganda. Were you born in Uganda?
No, I was born in Nairobi.
In Nairobi, so in East Africa.
And your husband was born?
In Uganda.
Oh, he was born in Uganda.
So you were the second generation in Uganda?
Yes.
So your brother and your parents...
All of them were from Nairobi.
So how many generations?
Who was the first person in your family to come to East Africa?
I think it was my great-grandfather.
Your great-grandfather.
So they didn't work in the railway, but in business?
Yes, but they came here during the railway.
When did the railway start?
They used to come here during the railway.
They used to do business.
Business. When the railway started, they used to come here.
And when did you come from India?
I don't know when I came from India, but I know that it's Gujarat.
Oh, okay. You came from Gujarat.
I think if you came at that time, you must have come to the village.
Because you used to come to the village first.
You used to come in a steamer.
So you three were your great-great-grandfathers.
How interesting.
And in Nairobi... What was your husband's name?
Sadurdin Pawpat Ali Bhai.
Sadurdin Bhai, right.
And Sadurdin Bhai's grandparents are from Gujarat, India.
His father is from India.
Oh, his father is from India.
Okay, so he later on...
Later on.
And what was his place of birth?
He was in Kikandwa.
In Kikandwa. Okay, in Nanakda, Kikandwa.
So when did you get married?
I came to Uganda from Nairobi.
How did you feel about coming to Uganda?
Alright, because I was used to it.
We used to live in Nairobi.
We used to live outside the town.
It was similar to Kikandwa.
Kikandwa, yes.
And your husband's father used to do business?
He used to do business, but he was very good.
Oh, okay, right.
Then everyone moved to Kampala.
Everyone got jobs.
Everyone used to work.
Okay, so his siblings and extended family were all in Kikandwa?
Yes, everyone moved.
Some went to Jindja, some went to Kampala.
Fatima was there.
I got all the proper details.
Who was Fatima?
You know, she passed away today.
She was 15 years old.
No, she was in Delhi.
She was 12 years old.
She was 13 or 14 years old.
She lived in Kadip?
Yes, she lived in Kadip.
She lived in Kadip.
So did Fatima remember everything?
Everything.
She could feel everything.
When she took the medicine, she could feel it.
She could feel her heart beating.
She could feel it.
She would feel it.
She started feeling it.
How long did you stay in Kikandwa?
I stayed in Kikandwa for a year because my husband was not working.
Then we went to Nammingora.
We stayed in Kikandwa for a year.
Then we came back to Kampala.
We came back to Kikandwa.
Kikandwa was settled.
Because we didn't have any business there.
My husband was working.
He was working in the village.
But in Kikandwa, he started his own business.
It was not a year or two.
We stayed in Kikandwa.
You were settled in Kikandwa.
How long did you stay in Uganda?
When did you come to Uganda?
In 1963.
You were in 1963.
You came in 1963.
You stayed in Uganda for 9 years.
How was your trip to Uganda?
What did you think of the village?
I liked it a lot.
Because the neighbors were very friendly.
They were very quiet and peaceful.
Did you miss this life?
Did you miss it?
I miss it a lot.
We saw all this, but we didn't see the rest.
That's true.
What was your favorite?
Did you like everything?
The forest?
The forest.
I liked everything.
Life was different here.
Life was different.
It was winter.
It was so cold.
I had a cold.
That's true.
When you left in 1972, you said...
I was 72.
How many children did you have?
I had 21.
Sheleena was 7.
I was 8.
All three children?
Yes.
When you announced to your mother
that you were leaving for three months,
how was the atmosphere there?
It was okay for us.
We didn't have any problems.
In the town,
we didn't have any problems.
We were like,
we'll change our minds tomorrow.
After a month or two,
we'll go back.
We'll go back.
That's true.
Did you feel lonely in your village?
Yes, a lot.
A lot.
When the shop was sold,
I felt very lonely.
When the shop was stolen,
did you feel lonely?
Yes.
When the shop was stolen,
did you feel lonely?
How was it?
Sheleena, can you explain?
When the shop was stolen,
did you feel lonely?
I felt lonely.
When the shop was stolen,
did you feel lonely?
Yes.
When the shop was stolen,
did you feel lonely?
I didn't feel lonely.
I was in Kikando,
in Busunju,
10-15 miles from Kampala.
I didn't feel lonely.
When the shop was stolen,
my husband was shot down.
He passed away.
Your husband?
Yes.
How was it?
When the shop was stolen,
the thieves were brought with guns?
Yes, with guns.
We had a petrol station.
We had to get petrol.
If it was Sunday, we couldn't work,
so we had to get petrol.
I went to get petrol and held my hand.
I asked, why are you holding my hand?
I didn't have petrol.
I was taken inside.
My husband was shot down.
He was shot dead.
I was shot dead.
It was natural.
Your husband's blessings.
Did you tell your son that you wanted him?
Yes.
I was going to Kampala.
Did you tell your son that you wanted him?
Yes, I told my mother.
Did you tell your mother?
Yes.
I was going to Karyani School.
Now people are smarter.
We have nothing to worry about.
When did you go back?
I went four years ago.
You didn't go to Uganda?
My mother, father and everyone else.
Now everyone is gone.
Your parents were in Nairobi?
Yes.
My sister's three sisters.
They died in the second week.
She was pregnant.
Yes.
She died of cancer.
This is our story.
This is our life.
Did you sell anything in business?
Yes, we sold everything.
We sold clothes.
We sold everything.
You had two children.
They were born in Kampala.
In some respect,
you were the reason for the theft.
You were the reason for the theft.
Yes.
We used to send them to Kampala.
They were born then.
How much did you earn?
We used to work.
What did you do?
I was a woman.
Did you take your children to Kampala?
Yes.
Did you get your visa?
Yes, I got my visa through Aga Khan.
Aga Khan.
I mean,
I was just saying that
Aga Khan, your son,
was helping in East Africa.
Yes.
How did you manage to get out of there?
How did you manage to get out?
I was not involved in that.
You were told to leave before you were even 20 years old.
Yes.
Our village head used to do everything.
He used to do everything.
How good was your work?
Everything was done.
Did your father have a passport?
My father had a British passport.
We came here.
We didn't know where we were from.
So your husband had a British passport.
Yes.
It was so difficult.
I was married for three generations.
I was married to a woman from India.
Her husband's father was also there.
But he was born in Uganda.
So, that was the peace.
Did your extended family have a British passport?
All of them had British passports.
So, your family had a British passport.
Yes.
My mother had a family in Nairobi.
My mother and father lived in the same house.
I had no other family.
The second person talking is Shalina,
who is the older daughter of Masi.
Masi.
Masi Karima.
Masi Karima Masi.
What did Shalina say?
She said that she had no other family in Uganda.
She only had her aunt and uncle.
She had no other family.
We had a check-up at the hospital.
My aunt and uncle.
Extended family.
But your relatives were all in Nairobi.
But when...
When did you leave Uganda?
I don't have a date or a month.
I left in October.
Do you think so?
What time did you arrive at the airport?
Stansted.
Then we went to the Toverstok Camp.
We went to the Toverstok Camp.
We spent two months here.
How long did you stay in Cardiff in October?
Then we went to Cardiff.
How was your life in the camp?
Royalty.
Really?
Your mother spoke English.
We had an apartment.
A small one.
A small room.
And the toilet and shower were separate.
Really nice.
Did you volunteer in the camp?
WRBS.
You volunteered there.
Yes.
We had to give clothes.
We gave information.
And the people who didn't know the language,
did you translate?
In our camp, we knew a lot of English.
We were 63.
I think the older people were older.
They were from the Kentucky side.
How old were you when you came here?
When I came from Uganda?
When you came from Uganda?
28 years old.
Young woman.
28 years.
78.
You're 78 now.
I'm 78 now.
But you're still a beauty.
Don't lie.
I'm telling the truth.
You volunteered in the camp.
Did you have enough food to eat?
Yes.
We usually eat beans, eggs, chips.
But we didn't have to.
We ate everything.
Then we went.
You volunteered.
We went to the 4th tower.
We didn't know where to go.
We were interested.
I was interested.
When was your first Eid?
When you came to this country?
When I came here.
It was very simple.
We all went to pray.
There was a time when the community grew.
Then we started celebrating.
Did you decide to go to Cardiff?
Or did they automatically decide to go to Cardiff?
I asked them where they wanted to go.
There were two places.
Scotland and London.
I said I didn't want to go anywhere.
I wanted to go to Scotland.
I went to Scotland.
I told my husband that it was so cold here.
She wouldn't be able to survive.
I said come tomorrow morning.
I'll show you the other house.
My husband went.
There was a house in Cardiff.
It was on Kifata Street.
This is the one.
I went to see the other house.
I was very scared.
I was afraid that I would die.
I was scared.
Did you know anyone?
I didn't know anyone.
But our social workers were very nice.
Their team was very nice.
I told them that this family is coming from Cardiff.
So they should be careful.
Was there a furniture in the house?
There was a table and chair in the furniture.
There was a pot in the furniture.
There were no shoes.
But in the house, we had A-Z approvals.
Oh gosh.
And we had rations in the house.
How nice.
I think someone from India might have helped people.
But we didn't have to go there.
We didn't have to go there.
Did you go to the Chokhrao School locally?
Yes, I went to Mr. Muniram.
Muniram was the head of the school.
Okay.
I went to Shailinan and Mehmugna.
I was very young.
I was in St. Peter's Church.
I stayed in the school.
Then I went to Howard Union.
I went to college.
I met all the two of them.
You met all the two of them.
Where is your son?
He is with me.
He went to take his daughter.
Where is he going? What is it called?
Aberystwyth.
Very nice.
You were quite young when you came here.
So your majority of life has gone here.
Yes.
What did you say?
Did you have any relatives in Cardiff?
We did have relatives.
But we didn't know much about the situation.
There was a Hindu woman from Uganda.
She said that our two students were living in the house.
They were living in the room downstairs.
On Friday, she made syrup for us.
Our Prasad was Sukhri.
Oh, Sukhri.
They made it for us.
Our son was making it for us on Friday.
Then she said that she was teaching us.
She made it for us.
Then she made it for us.
When we met them, I felt that it was time for us to go home.
One of them was a professor.
What did you do with Abdul Uncle?
I did a PhD.
Abdul Uncle was your local friend?
Yes, he was my local friend.
After that, we all went to the students' house.
Nobody knew about the house until then.
We stayed at our house.
Oh, your old house?
Yes, we stayed there for a year.
But then the government didn't come.
We went to school and then to school.
We stayed at the parade.
We went once a week.
We stayed there for a month.
But then the carpet, the bed, the bed,
the students, they didn't come.
They didn't come.
We stayed at the house.
We stayed in the flat.
We changed the flat.
In Saraswati?
Yes.
So you stayed in the flat where the house was?
Then we moved to the street.
What was the name of the street?
Elm Street.
In the corner.
Old people were in the community center.
They didn't know anything.
We took a smiley.
Now we are here.
Oh, on Elm Street?
Yes.
2001, 2002.
Before that, we were on Claude Road.
Claude Road.
How many families are there in Cardiff?
One year.
How many Ismaili families are there in Cardiff?
Is there a big community?
Not so much.
Our Cardiff is registered
as 130.
A small community.
There are students.
In Cardiff, there are only 50.
All the families are here.
Oh, the ones in the outskirts.
Swansi is our newly settled
family.
Swansi is our new settled family.
My name? Chandrika.
Very nice.
Tea, coffee.
Thank you so much.
So you are settled in our country.
You don't go to Nairobi for holidays.
Because your family was in Nairobi.
Yes.
My brother was in Uganda.
He passed away.
My brother passed away after that.
He was 12 years old.
And your husband lost his job?
Yes, he lost his job.
But why did he lose his job?
He was on a strike for two weeks.
He had connections with Ismaili families.
He was doing business.
I didn't know.
I was in the community.
I had to eat 50-60 people.
I had to come to the community.
The community was a home for students.
We had to sit on the stairs.
We had to wash.
I thought I should come.
I was in the sitting room.
How did your father's work go?
He could sign everyday.
Then he was sent to the British Steel.
Oh, right.
So he got the job in British Steel.
And he worked in British Steel all his life.
Did he change his job?
He changed his job in 1983.
He opened a shop in Ramni.
He opened a shop in Ramni in 1983.
He was given redundancy.
Then he went to Ramni
and took a land-trick major.
It was a council state.
It had been six months
and he didn't get much.
He had to leave before 6 in the morning.
He was tired.
He was in a car accident
in winter.
I didn't go.
I came to the city road.
There was a shop
in the city road.
It was a shop.
It was a news agency.
It was a small news agency.
When did you leave?
In 2000.
2002.
What did you do?
I was a
girl guide.
There was a shop in the city road.
I worked here.
I was a full-time worker.
I came home and washed clothes.
You washed clothes?
Yes.
Then I changed and took over the home.
That was a clinic job.
Then I got a nursing job.
Was that a hard job?
It was a hard job.
I had time with the old people.
They were hungry.
I just sat and ate.
It was a charitable thing.
Yes.
After a few years,
I found something decent.
Yes.
There was a post office
in the corner of the city road.
There was a post office.
I got a job there
as a catering.
As a catering.
I catered there for a little while.
Then my uncle told me to do a shop.
So you helped in the shop?
Yes, full-time.
You were full-time in the shop.
If I had my own shop, I could do it full-time.
I did it full-time.
Including Saturday and Sunday.
I could do everything on Sunday.
But if I had my own shop,
I could do it on Sunday for another two days.
Seven and a half days.
Did you get sick?
Yes, I had a spine operation.
Oh gosh, right, okay.
I thought about it.
I thought about getting a super-martial.
Because not only one person could do it.
I should go shopping and cook.
Because everyone else is in school.
Yes, yes.
Have you ever been to India?
No, I haven't.
I am very shocked that I haven't been there.
I have been to Shalina.
We all want to go.
Let's go.
I will take care of you.
Are you originally Indian?
No.
My father was born in India.
He was born in Uganda.
My father was born in 1935.
Young man, 18.
My father was born in the 1940s.
My father was born in Uganda.
So we were all born in Uganda.
We were born in India.
When I was in university, that was my first trip to India.
India.
But it's a culture shock for us.
Because it's nothing like Uganda.
So I did find it a culture shock.
Let's go.
So are you happy with your life?
Or are you feeling sad?
Are you feeling sad?
I am sad that we have to go somewhere
and make a proper history.
Fortaram.
And we have to go somewhere
and make a proper history.
And we are sad that
we don't know our own language.
Do you speak Gujarati?
Okay, that's difficult.
But
it'll have to be edited
and edited out.
But I think online Ismaili community
Maa Uganda Ni History is there.
Link is in the description.
And you can watch it.
Okay.
Go and have coffee.
This is like so typical of
India.
It's lovely.
Let her do it first and then we'll have tea.
Because she has work to do.
What is the best thing
that you feel
is the best experience
in your life?
Security.
Because life wasn't secure in Africa.
Because it was so easy to get anywhere.
It was so busy.
But when we came here
it was quiet.
It was quiet.
But it's security.
What is the best thing
in your life in this country?
Racism.
Okay.
Do you have experience with racism?
Yes, a lot.
Okay.
I was in the hospital for 30-35 years.
I was crying everyday.
Oh, your neighbors?
Yes.
I can't hear you.
So,
you had experienced racism earlier on?
Yes.
I went to the hospital because
I had to go to the check-up.
I was at home.
I was coming from outside.
The door was not open.
I was sleeping in the letter box.
I was sleeping.
She came down and pulled me inside.
She said, there are 12 cars outside.
She apologized
because she was listening to music.
Your daughter?
Yes, because she was sleeping.
The door was open and she was listening to music.
There was no one in the house.
I apologized
and said, I'm sorry.
That you were listening to music.
She came down and pulled me inside.
She was sleeping on the gate.
I still call the police.
I was afraid what I would do.
My son was studying in London.
My daughter was shocked.
She didn't know what to do.
I went to the shop and told them that I was not well.
When I decided, the police came to our house.
Who called the police?
The neighbor.
She said, my mother died.
She said it was a lie?
Yes, she died.
She had cancer and bruised her breast.
I was in jail for two years.
You were in jail?
Yes.
She was very shocked.
She was shocked.
They said that a police officer called the police.
How old was he?
He was 5 years old.
He was a male.
He was a female.
A police officer was called a policeman.
He was a male.
He was a policeman.
But then they said, this can't go on.
So, we went and did it.
Did they say that they were okay?
Yes, they were okay.
So, you felt bad because you still had to record everything?
Yes, it was okay.
But if there was a problem, we would write it down.
We would write down the names.
God.
Did you feel that the police didn't give you the information
because your skin is different in color?
No, no.
If they gave me the information, I would have been finished.
Because they didn't give me anything.
They gave me the information.
They didn't give me anything.
There is racism.
Okay.
Then you went to court.
Oh, you went to court and filed a case?
Yes, I filed a case.
I was sentenced to one year in prison.
Until then, I was in prison.
Okay.
You were in peace after the case?
Yes, I was in peace.
We still have problems.
If someone wants to see the case, they can start.
If someone wants to see us, they can start.
We have to do something about our past.
Oh, you have to do repairs.
I don't believe that someone will call the police.
They will harass me.
The police can't do anything because it's a private matter.
So, we still have problems.
How long have you been in trouble?
Since I came here.
I was living in the next room.
For 23 years?
For 23 years.
I came here after I came here.
Gosh.
When did your husband pass away?
2011.
2011?
On 13th.
January.
Yes, January.
2011.
Was it a big loss for you?
Yes.
At that time, he was at home.
He was at home.
He had a stroke after he went to the shop.
After your husband went to the shop for a stroke.
Gosh.
Did he have a disability after the stroke?
Or did he recover?
He had a disability.
He couldn't speak or move.
He couldn't use his hands.
Right side.
So, right side didn't have a stroke.
So, that must have been quite hard.
It was hard.
But I think it was good it happened at that time.
Because there were many facilities.
There were many facilities in the hospital.
If you see people coming and going, they would help.
But then it's all gone.
It's all gone.
It's not like there were any facilities.
Social services.
Social workers.
Who are social workers?
You don't know.
So, what did you say at that time?
When your husband had a stroke,
was it according to the condition of the local authority?
It was according to the condition of the local authority.
That you were getting enough support.
Now you are a bit elderly.
So, it's not a very good situation.
If there was any support, it's not that easy.
Giving money even, it's not easy.